Include backtracking in user guide (#9040)
pypa/pip: docs/html/user_guide.rst

the same package over and over again during an install?"*.

The purpose of this section is to provide explanation of why
backtracking happens, and practical suggestions to pip users who
encounter it during a ``pip install``.

What is backtracking?
---------------------

Backtracking is not a bug, or an unexpected behaviour. It is part of the
way pip's dependency resolution process works.

During a pip install (e.g. ``pip install tea``), pip needs to work out
the package's dependencies (e.g. ``spoon``, ``hot-water``, ``cup`` etc), the
versions of each of these packages it needs to install. For each of these
it needs to decide which version is a good candidate to install.

A "good candidate" means a version of each package that is compatible with all
the other package versions being installed at the same time.

In the case where a package has a lot of versions, arriving at a good
candidate can take a lot of time. (The amount of time depends on the
package size, the number of versions pip must try, and other concerns.)

How does backtracking work?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When doing a pip install, it needs to start by making assumptions about the

> packages it needs to install. During the install process it needs check this
> assumptions as it goes along.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packages it needs to install. During the install process it needs to check these
assumptions as it goes along.
```

When it finds that an assumption is incorrect, it has to try another approach
(backtrack), which means discarding some of the work that has already been done,
and going back to choose another path.

For example; The user requests ``pip install tea``. ```tea`` has dependencies of
``cup``, ``hot-water``, ``spoon`` amongst others.

pip starts by installing a version of ``cup``. If it finds out it isn’t
compatible (with the other package versions) it needs to “go back”
(backtrack) and download an older version.

It then tries to install that version. If it is successful, it will continue
onto the next package. If not it will continue to backtrack until it finds a
compatible version.

This backtrack behaviour can end in 2 ways - either 1) it will

> successfully find a set packages it can install (good news!), or 2) it will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
successfully find a set of packages it can install (good news!), or 2) it will
```

eventually display `resolution impossible <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/user_guide/#id35>`__ error
message (not so good).

If pip starts backtracking during dependency resolution, it does not
know how long it will backtrack, and how much computation would be
needed. For the user this means it can take a long time to complete.

Why does backtracking occur?
----------------------------

With the release of the new resolver (:ref:`Resolver changes 2020`), pip is now

> more strict in the package versions it installs when a users runs a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more strict in the package versions it installs when a user runs a
```

``pip install`` command.

Pip needs to backtrack because initially, it doesn't have all the information it
needs to work out the correct set of packages. This is because package indexes
don't provide full package dependency information before you have downloaded
the package.

This new resolver behaviour means that pip works harder to find out which
version of a package is a good candidate to install. It reduces the risk that
installing a new package will accidentally break an existing installed package,

> and so reducing the risk of your environment gets messed up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and so reduces the risk that your environment gets messed up.
```

What does this behaviour look like?
-----------------------------------

Right now backtracking behaviour looks like this:

::

   $ pip install tea==1.9.8
   Collecting tea==1.9.8
   Downloading tea-1.9.8-py2.py3-none-any.whl (346 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 346 kB 10.4 MB/s
   Collecting spoon==2.27.0
   Downloading spoon-2.27.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (312 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 312 kB 19.2 MB/s
   Collecting hot-water>=0.1.9

>    Downloading hot-water-0.1.13-py3-none-any.whl (9.3 kB)

Reviewer 2: I think we should fix the indentation here.

Author: Can you tell me specifically what needs to be fixed? Do you mean outdent/dedent it?

Reviewer 2: This example does not indent the contents (like the Downloading lines) while pip's output does:

```
$ pip install pytest
Collecting pytest
  Downloading pytest-6.1.1-py3-none-any.whl (272 kB)
     |████████████████████████████████| 272 kB 3.6 MB/s 
Collecting pluggy<1.0,>=0.12
  Downloading pluggy-0.13.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (18 kB)
Requirement already satisfied: packaging in /Users/pradyunsg/.virtualenvs/pip/lib/python3.8/site-packages (from pytest) (20.4)
Collecting iniconfig
  Downloading iniconfig-1.1.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (5.0 kB)
Collecting attrs>=17.4.0
  Downloading attrs-20.2.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (48 kB)
     |████████████████████████████████| 48 kB 10.7 MB/s 
Requirement already satisfied: toml in /Users/pradyunsg/.virtualenvs/pip/lib/python3.8/site-packages (from pytest) (0.10.1)
Collecting py>=1.8.2
  Downloading py-1.9.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (99 kB)
     |████████████████████████████████| 99 kB 4.0 MB/s 
Requirement already satisfied: six in /Users/pradyunsg/.virtualenvs/pip/lib/python3.8/site-packages (from packaging->pytest) (1.15.0)
Requirement already satisfied: pyparsing>=2.0.2 in /Users/pradyunsg/.virtualenvs/pip/lib/python3.8/site-packages (from packaging->pytest) (2.4.7)
Installing collected packages: pluggy, iniconfig, attrs, py, pytest
Successfully installed attrs-20.2.0 iniconfig-1.1.1 pluggy-0.13.1 py-1.9.0 pytest-6.1.1
```

This option is a progression of 2 above. It requires users to know how
to inspect:

-  the packages they're are trying to install
-  the package release frequency and compatibility policies
-  their release notes and changelogs from past versions

During deployment, you can create a lockfile stating the exact package and
version number for for each dependency of that package. You can create this
with `pip-tools <https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools/>`__.

This means the "work" is done once during development process, and so
will save users this work during deployment.

The pip team is not available to provide support in helping you create a
suitable constraints file.

.. _4-be-more-strict-on-package-dependencies-during-development:

4. Be more strict on package dependencies during development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For package maintainers during the development, give pip some help by
creating constraint files for the dependency tree. This will reduce the
number of versions it will try.

Getting help
------------

If none of the suggestions above work for you, we recommend that you ask
for help and you've got `a number of

> options <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/user_guide/#getting-help>`__.

Reviewer 2: This links to the same section? Or am I missing something?

Further, we should probably have a relative link, via an anchor (i.e. when specified as `.. _anchor:`, we'd want to do `` `location <anchor>`__ `` in this document -- instead of a link under to https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest.

Basically, `<getting-help>` instead of the link here.

Author: Yes, I am suggesting linking the user to the help section. I'll add the relative link now.

Reviewer: Great - let us know if you need help.

.. _"How do I ask a good question?": https://stackoverflow.com/help/how-to-ask
.. _pip issue tracker: https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues

.. _`Dependency resolution backtracking`:

Dependency resolution backtracking
==================================

Or more commonly known as *"Why does pip download multiple versions of
the same package over and over again during an install?"*.

The purpose of this section is to provide explanation of why
backtracking happens, and practical suggestions to pip users who
encounter it during a ``pip install``.

What is backtracking?
---------------------

Backtracking is not a bug, or an unexpected behaviour. It is part of the
way pip's dependency resolution process works.

During a pip install (e.g. ``pip install tea``), pip needs to work out
the package's dependencies (e.g. ``spoon``, ``hot-water``, ``cup`` etc), the

> versions of each of these packages it needs to install. For each of these
> it needs to decide which version is a good candidate to install.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
versions of each of these packages it needs to install. For each package
pip needs to decide which version is a good candidate to install.
```

A "good candidate" means a version of each package that is compatible with all
the other package versions being installed at the same time.

In the case where a package has a lot of versions, arriving at a good
candidate can take a lot of time. (The amount of time depends on the
package size, the number of versions pip must try, and other concerns.)

How does backtracking work?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When doing a pip install, it needs to start by making assumptions about the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When doing a pip install, pip starts by making assumptions about the
```

packages it needs to install. During the install process it needs to check these
assumptions as it goes along.

> When it finds that an assumption is incorrect, it has to try another approach

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When pip finds that an assumption is incorrect, it has to try another approach
```

(backtrack), which means discarding some of the work that has already been done,
and going back to choose another path.

For example; The user requests ``pip install tea``. ```tea`` has dependencies of
``cup``, ``hot-water``, ``spoon`` amongst others.

pip starts by installing a version of ``cup``. If it finds out it isn’t
compatible (with the other package versions) it needs to “go back”
(backtrack) and download an older version.

It then tries to install that version. If it is successful, it will continue
onto the next package. If not it will continue to backtrack until it finds a
compatible version.

This backtrack behaviour can end in 2 ways - either 1) it will
successfully find a set of packages it can install (good news!), or 2) it will

> eventually display `resolution impossible <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/user_guide/#id35>`__ error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eventually display a `resolution impossible <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/user_guide/#id35>`__ error
```

> message (not so good).

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should make this a numbered list?

```
1. it will successfully..., or
2. it will eventually...
```

If pip starts backtracking during dependency resolution, it does not
know how long it will backtrack, and how much computation would be
needed. For the user this means it can take a long time to complete.

Why does backtracking occur?
----------------------------

With the release of the new resolver (:ref:`Resolver changes 2020`), pip is now
more strict in the package versions it installs when a user runs a
``pip install`` command.

Pip needs to backtrack because initially, it doesn't have all the information it
needs to work out the correct set of packages. This is because package indexes
don't provide full package dependency information before you have downloaded
the package.

This new resolver behaviour means that pip works harder to find out which
version of a package is a good candidate to install. It reduces the risk that
installing a new package will accidentally break an existing installed package,

> and so reducing the risk that your environment gets messed up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and so reduces the risk that your environment gets messed up.

Please address this.
```

can be trial and error.

.. _3-use-constraint-files-or-lockfiles:

3. Use constraint files or lockfiles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This option is a progression of 2 above. It requires users to know how
to inspect:

-  the packages they're are trying to install
-  the package release frequency and compatibility policies
-  their release notes and changelogs from past versions

During deployment, you can create a lockfile stating the exact package and
version number for for each dependency of that package. You can create this
with `pip-tools <https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools/>`__.

This means the "work" is done once during development process, and so
will save users this work during deployment.

The pip team is not available to provide support in helping you create a
suitable constraints file.

.. _4-be-more-strict-on-package-dependencies-during-development:

4. Be more strict on package dependencies during development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For package maintainers during the development, give pip some help by
creating constraint files for the dependency tree. This will reduce the

> number of versions it will try.

Reviewer: In a later, followup PR, it would be nice for someone to expand this section and add more details.

Getting help
------------

If none of the suggestions above work for you, we recommend that you ask

> for help and you've got `a number of
> options :ref:`Getting help`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for help and you've got `a number of options :ref:`Getting help`.
```

.. _`Using pip from your program`:

Backtracking user guide information

> ===================================

Reviewer 3: This section is presumably temporary? Is the expectation that this PR gets updated once the final location is agreed, or are you hoping to merge this with the note that we'll move it later included?

Personally, I'd rather see it in its correct place from the start, as I think moving it (and the temporary note) will be confusing.

Author: Gah. Apologies, thats my mistake. That shouldn't have been included.

Related to `GH issue 8713 <https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/8713>`__.

Objective
---------

The purpose of this content is to provide documentation of 1) why this
occurs, and 2) how the user can possible solve it.

Location
--------

The end location of this content will be on\ `the pip user
guide <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/user_guide/#id35>`__, somewhere
near the Resolution Impossible section.

--------------

Dependency resolution backtracking
==================================

Or more commonly known as *"Why does pip download multiple versions of
the same package over and over again during an install?"*.

The purpose of this section is to provide explanation of why
backtracking happens, and practical suggestions to pip users who
encounter dependency resolution backtracking during a ``pip install``
command.

What is backtracking?
---------------------

Backtracking is not a bug, or an unexpected behaviour. It is part of the
way pip's dependency resolution process works.

During a pip install (e.g. ``pip install tea``), pip needs to work out

> the packages dependencies (e.g. ``spoon``, ``hot-water``, ``cup`` etc),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the package's dependencies (e.g. ``spoon``, ``hot-water``, ``cup`` etc),
```

(or "the package dependencies")

and the versions of each of these packages it needs to install.

For each of these dependent packages, it needs to work out which version

> of a package is a good candidate to install.

Reviewer: What does "a good candidate" mean? I would say something like "is a good candidate to install. A good candidate, in general, it is compatible with all the other packages the user has already installed, or is installing in the same command, and works with other requirements or constraints the user has specified". @pfmoore is that mostly ok as a one-sentence simplification?

Reviewer 3: Yes, that seems OK to me. Maybe in the longer term, we should have somewhere in the architecture docs that describes *precisely* what a compatible candidate is, and then link to that from here. But as a summary the above is good.

Author: In the context of this *backtracking* - a good candidate is specifically versions of these packages that are compatible *1) with the other packages in this install process*? Or *2) with the other packages in this install process and every other package installed in this environment*? From the discussion with @pradyunsg I understood it was the first.

If it is 1) then since this documentation is about backtracking specifically, the information priority should focus on it.

I propose, "A good candidate is compatible with all the other packages versions being installing in the same command, and works with other requirements or constraints the user has specified".

Reviewer 3: Yes, I'm pretty sure it's (1), although there's definitely an argument for (2) - we had that argument in a ticket somewhere, and while I think we decided on (1) it wasn't clear-cut, and I could see the case for changing the behaviour in the future.

Are we over-thinking this? I get the impression that the people concerned with "why is pip downloading loads of versions of this package" probably won't understand (or care about) these nuances...

Reviewer 2: > Are we over-thinking this? I get the impression that the people concerned with "why is pip downloading loads of versions of this package" probably won't understand (or care about) these nuances...

I feel like clarifying what a "good candidate" means is a good idea. I'm not sure what level of detail we should go into here, and I haven't thought about this enough to have an opinion on it.

> we had that argument in a ticket somewhere

#7744 -- why do I remember these numbers. :(

If everythig goes well, this will result in pip computing a set of
compatible versions of all these packages.

In the case where a package has a lot of versions, arriving at a good
candidate can take a lot of time. (The amount of time depends on the

> package size, the number of versions pip must try, among other things)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package size, the number of versions pip must try, and other concerns.)
```

How does backtracking work?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> pip does this by trying one version, if it finds out it isn’t compatible
> it needs to “go back” (backtrack) and download an older version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip starts by trying one version. If pip finds out it isn’t compatible,
it needs to “go back” (backtrack) and download an older version.
```

> It then tries that version, if it is successful it will continue onto
> the next package - if not it will continue to backtrack until it finds a
> compatible version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It then tries that version. If it is successful, it will continue onto
the next package. If not, it will continue to backtrack until it finds a
compatible version.
```

At the end of this process, pip will have the set of compatible
packages, which it then installs.

This backtrack behaviour can end in 2 ways - either 1) it will
successfully find a set packages it can install (good news!), or 2) it
will eventually display `resolution
impossible <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/user_guide/#id35>`__ error
message (not so good).

If pip starts backtracking during dependency resolution, it does not
know how long it will backtrack, and how much computation would be
needed.

Why does backtracking occur?
----------------------------

> With the release of the new resolver (resolver 2020), pip is now more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the release of the new resolver (:ref:`Resolver changes 2020`), pip is now more
```

This way you can link directly to the part of the documentation that explains the new resolver.

> strict in the package versions it installs, when a users does a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strict in the package versions it installs when a user runs a
```

``pip install`` command. This new behaviour means that pip works harder

> to find out which version of a package is a good candidate to install.

Reviewer: This is true.

I also think it would be good here to say: This new behaviour, therefore, reduces the risk that installing a new package will accidentally break an existing installed package so your environment gets messed up.

Also, I think readers will be interested in a deeper reason why pip needs to backtrack: there are millions of packages in the world, both public and private, and there is no all-encompassing index of what packages depend on and require, and the maintainers of packages do not coordinate with each other to make sure things work together. So pip doesn't know whether this new package is going to be compatible with the existing packages/constraints/requirements until it tries. I think this is a reasonable user-readable summary - @pfmoore @pradyunsg @uranusjr ? is it accurate enough?

Reviewer 3: I'd explain that somewhat differently (the "millions of packages" idea seems like a distraction to me).

Pip needs to backtrack because initially, it doesn't have all the information it needs to work out the correct set of packages. This is because package indexes don't provide full package dependency information before you have downloaded the package. So pip needs to start by making assumptions, and check as it goes along. When it finds that an assumption is incorrect, it has to try another approach, which means discarding some of the work that has already been done, and going back to choose another path.

Author: > Pip needs to backtrack because initially, it doesn't have all the information it needs to work out the correct set of packages. This is because package indexes don't provide full package dependency information before you have downloaded the package.

I've included this in the *why* section.

> So pip needs to start by making assumptions, and check as it goes along. When it finds that an assumption is incorrect, it has to try another approach, which means discarding some of the work that has already been done, and going back to choose another path.

This reads more as *why* pip needs to do this, so I've moved it there.

   Downloading cup-3.18.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (393 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 393 kB 22.1 MB/s
   Downloading cup-3.17.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (382 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 382 kB 23.8 MB/s
   Downloading cup-3.16.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (376 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 376 kB 27.5 MB/s
   Downloading cup-3.15.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (385 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 385 kB 30.4 MB/s
   INFO: pip is looking at multiple versions of this package to determine
   which version is compatible with other requirements.
   This could take a while.
   Downloading cup-3.15.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (378 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 378 kB 21.4 MB/s
   Downloading cup-3.14.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (372 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 372 kB 21.1 MB/s
   Downloading cup-3.13.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (381 kB)
   |████████████████████████████████| 381 kB 21.8 MB/s
   This is taking longer than usual. You might need to provide the
   dependency resolver with stricter constraints to reduce runtime.
   If you want to abort this run, you can press Ctrl + C to do so.
   Downloading cup-3.13.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (374 kB)

> In the above sample output, pip must downloaded multiple versions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above sample output, pip had to download multiple versions of
```

package cup - cup-3.22.0 to cup-3.13.0 - to find a version that will be
compatible with the other packages - ``spoon``, ``hot-water``, ``cup``
etc.

> These multiple ``Downloading cup-version`` lines shows pip backtracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These multiple ``Downloading cup-version`` lines show pip backtracking.
```

Reviewer: This still needs to be fixed. :-)

Author: I had to reread this multiple times before I could actually see what was wrong here. 😫

Possible ways to reduce backtracking occuring
---------------------------------------------

It's important to mention backtracking behaviour is expected during a
``pip install`` process. What pip is trying to do is complicated - it is
working through potentially millions of package versions to identify the

> comptible versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compatible versions.
```

There is no guaranteed solution to backtracking but you can reduce it -
here are a number of ways.

.. _1-allow-pip-to-complete-its-backtracking:

1. Allow pip to complete its backtracking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In most cases, pip will complete the backtracking process successfully.
It is possible this could take a very long time to complete - this may
not be the preferred option.

However there is a possibility pip will not be able to find a set of
compatible versions.

If you'd prefer not to wait, you can interrupt pip (ctrl and c) and use

> constraints to reduce the number of package versions it tries.

Reviewer: I suggest you link here to the "constraints" section of the documentation.

Reviewer: Please link here to the "constraints" section of the docs.

.. _2-reduce-the-versions-of-the-backtracking-package:

> 2. Reduce the versions of the backtracking package

Reviewer: This heading is a little confusing -- do you mean "reduce the number of versions that pip will try" or "reduce the version numbers of the package"? I think you mean the former, so maybe a good heading is:

Reduce the number of versions pip will try to backtrack through

or

Limit the version range of the backtracking package

Reviewer: Please address this.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If pip is backtracking more than you'd like, the next option is to
constrain the number of package versions it tries.

A first good candidate for this constraining is the package(s) it is
backtracking on (e.g. in the above example - ``cup``).

You could try:

> ``pip install tea cup > 3.13``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``pip install tea "cup > 3.13"``
```

Without quotes, this will be a shell redirection, not a constraint. That's really confusing when it happens (I know, I've done it myself many times!)

This will reduce the number of versions of ``cup`` it tries, and
possibly reduce the time pip takes to install.

> There is a possibility that if you're wrong (in this case a newer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a possibility that if you're wrong (in this case an older
```

version would have worked) then you missed the chance to use it. This
can be trial and error.

.. _3-use-constraint-files-or-lockfiles:

3. Use constraint files or lockfiles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This option is a progression of 2 above. It requires users to know how
to inspect:

> -  the packages they're are trying to install

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  the packages they're trying to install
```

Reviewer: Please address this.

-  the package release frequency and compatibility policies
-  their release notes and changelogs from past versions

> During deployment creating a lockfile stating the exact package and
> version number for for each dependency of that package. You can do this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During deployment, you can use a lockfile stating the exact package and
version number for for each dependency of that package. You can create this
```

with `pip-tools <https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools/>`__.

This means the "work" is done once during development process, and so
will save users this work during deployment.

The pip team is not available to provide support in helping you create a
suitable constraints file.

.. _4-be-more-strict-on-package-dependencies-during-development:

4. Be more strict on package dependencies during development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For package maintainers during the development, give pip some help by
creating constraint files for the dependency tree. This will reduce the
number of versions it will try.

If you (as the user installing a package) see the package has specific
version dependencies, you could contact the maintainer and ask them to

> be more strict with the packages requirements.

Reviewer 3: In general, stricter dependencies on general-purpose libraries an anti-pattern, and is *not* advised. It makes it much harder to use libraries, and increases the possibility that no resolution is possible.

I'm pretty strongly against this suggestion, as it could create a culture of over-specification.

Author: OK thanks. I'll defer to your experience on this part.
